Did we just find planet
9? There have been many predictions over
the years of a giant planet wandering
the extreme outer solar system. And
there have been a number of good reasons
why this might be true. There's been a
bias in the distribution of the
direction of the orbits of long period
comets. There's been a strange
distribution of orbits for the objects
in the scattered
disc. And when we run simulations of the
early solar system, it's hard to make
something that fits the distribution of
the giant planets that we
have. So there's even been a name
suggested for this wandering giant
planet, Ty, the Greek goddess of
fortune, the good sister of Nemesis.
Some people have suggested that it might
be four times the mass of Jupiter orbit
15,000 astronomical units out from the
sun. An AU is the Earth's sun distance.
So this is a quarter of a lightyear and
it would take 1.8 million years to go
around the sun at that distance. This
seems extremely difficult to rationalize
as to how it might remain attached to
the gravity of the sun if it was that
far away due to passing stars. And of
course out that far it would be cold
with just a little bit of the heat of
formation and the radioactivity within
the body keeping it above zero above the
temperature of outer space in general
but detectable by infrared I would have
thought.
and others have suggested more sensible
orbits, 500 astronomical units, 20,000
years, those sorts of numbers, much
greater than any object that we've
discovered to date.
So the reasons for all of this are the
long period comets that seem to come in
from the cloud, that hypothetical
reservoir of icy bodies right out at the
limit of the sun's influence that may
get deflected inwards occasionally by
gravitational interactions and fall
inwards towards the inner solar system.
And uh we see a lot of those and there
have been analysis in the past that
suggests that perhaps they're not coming
in at random and that maybe there is
something deflecting them that we
haven't yet discovered. Some massive
extreme outer solar system body maybe
even a companion of the sun.
Then we have the scattered disc, the
orbits of the objects beyond the Kiper
cliff, beyond the end of the Kiper belt,
that second asteroid belt beyond
Neptune, out beyond about 55 or 60
astronomical units. And the first object
to be found out there was Sednner. And
we can see these uh scale maps of the
solar system from the inner to the outer
solar system then to Sednner's orbit
which is the big long thin elliptical
orbit way out beyond Pluto taking
11,400 years to complete one lap and
going out from a close approach at 76 AU
going all the way out to 937 nearly a
thousand Earth sun distances away.
That's an enormous orbit. Um, but Mike
Brown from Caltech said of Sednner that
it shouldn't really be there. He said
there's no way to put Sedna where it is.
It's never coming close enough to the
sun, nor is it far enough away to be
affected by passing stars. So, it's a
bit of a weird one, that one. And it has
a number of companions, the Sednoids, as
they're now known. I've talked about
those in other videos, but they all seem
to be clustered with their long axis of
their elliptical orbits over towards one
side of the solar system, suggesting
that something is marshalling them. This
hypothetical planet
9. So, the third reason for all of this
is the gas giants of the solar system.
They probably formed by sweeping up
material and as they grew they would
spiral inwards due to friction and in
particular Jupiter and Saturn got into a
1:2 orbital resonance fairly early on.
They're now not in that pattern. They're
in a 5:2 ratio now. But a 1:2 ratio was
very unstable. And the simulation that
is running on the right which is
repeating
begins with five giant planets in red
dots there and simulates the motion
around
the event that happens after about 20
million years is that in fact one of the
giant planets gets hurled out of the
system. So there's five. We start going,
we run for a while and then this
happens. One of them gets kicked way out
and we end up with four and it disrupts
a lot of the uh material in the Kiper
belt rather which may account for the
late heavy bombardment of the planets of
the inner solar system with a lot of
cratering that seems to have gone on
about 3.8 billion years ago or so.
So, there are several reasons why there
might be this fifth giant planet
somewhere out in the extreme solar
system, but we've looked and we haven't
found anything up to now. The IRAS
satellite infrared surveys of the 1980s
looked around the whole sky. The two
mass survey did the same in 1997 to
2001. And we've got the Wise spacecraft
up there, another infrared explorer. And
they found nothing. Well, they found
things, but they're all more distant out
in the uh galaxy. As close as about six
light years, but still nowhere near the
uh solar system or the scattered disc,
which is where we're really
looking. In fact, they have ruled out
pretty much anything of any significant
size. out to about a thousand light
years. Uh not a thousand lighty years, a
thousand astronomical units. I beg you
pardon. But the problem is that we've
still got those issues with the sedoids
and the long period comets and perhaps
even with our
simulations. So what's this new result
all about? Well, it's taken two surveys.
the IRA survey from the 1980s and the
Japanese Accari survey from 2006 to 7.
And with the two of these surveys
individually, they only spend a few
years each. And a moving object in the
outer part of the solar system would not
move very far in just a couple of years.
But by comparing the two, we have a 23
year long baseline and that's much more
effective.
So, how far would an object out there
move in 23 years? Well, let's make it
easy. Let's start with a
23,000year long orbit. Maybe at around
about 500 astronomical units from the
sun. This would manage to cover 1,000th
of its orbit in 23 years. Nice easy
calculation. and a thousandth of 360.
Well, that's 36 of a degree, 21 arc
minutes. We would be able to detect that
relatively easily. It's large enough to
see without being so huge as to give us
a
problem. So, all we have to do is look
at the two surveys and compare all the
readings. Now the problem with that is
that IRS measured
350,000 sources and Aari 1.3 million. So
you have to compare every one against
every other one
potentially if you're going to do this
by brute force and you end up with 455
billion comparisons. Now even with a
fast computer that's going to take a
while.
not impossible, but we probably should
filter it down. So, first of all, let's
eliminate stationary objects. If there
are only uh we're looking at the objects
that are present in one survey and
missing in the other one, not in the
same place, then we can eliminate all
the things that don't appear to move.
And that gives us a list of potential
moving targets. But of course, they
might be other things. They might be
novas or distant supernovi flaring up.
They might be passing asteroids from the
asteroid belt much closer. And of
course, if they just appear once in the
image, then that's going to be a real
problem. And they could be random
events. Cosmic ray strikes in the
electronics. All sorts of things can
cause a sudden dot in your data that is
there one moment and gone the next.
But we've already estimated that the
movement should be a of the order of.36
of a degree. So we could ignore anything
too far apart. If we have two objects in
our list
of things that have appeared in one
photograph and not in the other and we
compare them all against each other,
well, we only have to worry about the
ones that are relatively nearby, maybe
between uh half of 36 and double 36. So
that would cut it down
dramatically. We can also only look at
things that are of the same brightness.
This is an image of uh a kiper belt
object that's been circled there. And
you can see there are many many dots in
the image. This could be a real problem
trying to compare all of these. But you
can pick ones that are of similar
brightness between two positions and
then maybe get rid of an awful lot of
the comparisons that you would have to
worry about.
We can also decide that we want to set a
limit for how bright the target is
likely to be. Are we looking for a
really bright object or a really faint
object or somewhere in between? And so
we could choose a range of brightnesses
and throw away things that are too
bright or things that are too faint. But
we have to kind of know the answer for
that. And I have in included here the
discovery photograph from the discovery
of Pluto illustrated by the arrow there.
And there are two frames just part of
the right hand one is visible. But you
can see it's supposed to be the
same. And Pluto is present in one and
gone in the other. But so are a lot of
other objects that were in fact just
background stars. So you could see that
this could be a little bit difficult.
So, how many pairs of our potential 455
billion comparisons made it through all
of those criteria, that giant set of
filters to knock that dumb number down?
Well, the answer was 13. And that's much
more
manageable. Understatement really, but
there you go. So, it was enough that
visual inspection could be taken. we can
have the human brain and the mark one
eyeball take a look at 13 potential
pairs. And by doing that, the original
authors of the paper that came up with
this result eliminated 12 and just left
one candidate that looked
plausible. So what did they say about
it? Well, it appeared to be about 500
astronomical units from the sun and
maybe somewhere in the range 7 to 17
Earth masses. So that's somewhere in the
super Earth or sub Neptune territory.
Quite plausible in fact. But of course,
the filtering process was only going to
let through candidates that were
matching these criteria because we'd
already selected only those things that
had moved about the right amount for 500
astronomical units and only those things
that would have been around about the
right brightness for that
distance. Are there any issues with
this? Well, it's only a pair of
observations. The picture on the right
is the discovery image for Albian 1992
QB1 by Dave Jwitt and Jane Louu in
Hawaii. The first Kiperell object to be
discovered after
Pluto. And there are three detection
images here spaced across different uh
dates. And the object has moved between
the three of them. and the distance it's
moved seems to be in agreement with a
moving object along an orbit. And three
observations is so much better and more
convincing than just two. First of all,
there are uh three factorial ways of
arranging three things. So you've got a
one in six chance of them being aligned
like this rather than uh if there are
only two where your chances are two
factorial uh which is two. So you're
three times better off with three
objects than two. And if the speeds
match as well then you've got a whole
extra constraint. So I think that's much
more convincing. And in the case of
Kepler and discovering exoplanets,
something which I know something about,
then you really need to find three
transit events in order to prove that
you have a proper transit rather than
just a couple of random events that look
similar. The distance, the time between
those transits being equal is a crucial
factor. So I would be more convinced if
we were to find a third event, a third
image and be able to line those things
up. And the other problem is that with
all of those possible sources and all
those
500 thou um the 500 billion pairs 455
billion pairs of possible uh lineups
that you had in the original data set.
The chance of finding that you have a
couple of
objects of roughly equal brightness
fairly close together somewhere in the
data has to be fairly significant.
uh somebody who's good at statistics
could probably do the maths on that and
they would uh I think come out with the
fact that it's quite likely that you
might find a false positive for a couple
of randomly moving asteroids much closer
to us or a distant nova perhaps one of
each who knows there are many ways in
which you might find one object out of
that many pairs so what do I think is
the answer. Well, I do hope that this
turns out to be correct, but these sorts
of tentative results don't often get
confirmed, so I wouldn't get my hopes
up. And I would caution you with the
discovery of Vulcan, when the
hypothetical Vulcan planet moved across
in front of the
sun, Dr. Allesco spotted a moving object
and he'd already read the letter
published by Leverier suggesting that
such an object might be present. So he
was already inclined to believe it. And
of course Leier when he went to inspect
Leabau's uh observatory and try and
prove that this was true was doing
exactly that. he was confirming that his
theory was true rather than trying to
prove it false. And so you have to be a
little careful
here. So what do we need to do? We have
to follow up. And I would say that's
exactly what the original authors of the
paper had to say. They're not claiming a
discovery. They're just claiming an
intriguing possibility. One of the
things I love about astronomy is that we
just don't know. Something that Sir
Patrick Moore used to say on many
occasions. And uh I'm very very
interested to see what happens to this
story as we go forward. So, thanks very
much for listening and I hope you found
that interesting. Bye for now.